Good afternoon, everybody.
I'm Mike Ferris,
and I'm really pleased to be here today.
I hope that a lot of you saw the
demo of Dashcode that was in the
Developer Technologies State of
the Union on Monday.
And for those of you who did,
I just wanted to say that, Dave,
you know, if you're out there,
I have faith that this is where you
would have chosen to go this afternoon.
Now, we introduced Dashcode in
the Leopard release of the
developer tools a while back,
and it was a brand-new
IDE for developing widgets,
dashboard widgets.
Now, we actually, we love widgets.
And in fact,
there's a session on Friday where
we're going to talk about all of
the stuff that we've been doing for
widget developers and about how to
use Dashcode to develop widgets.
But today, I'd like to focus on the
new version of Dashcode,
Dashcode 2.0,
which is shipping with the iPhone SDK.
In this version,
we've actually taken advantage of
the web technology foundation that
Dashcode is built upon to add support
for developing iPhone web applications.
That's what I want to talk
to you about here today.
We actually have a full session today.
We're going to talk-- I'll give
you a brief tour of Dashcode first.
And then we're going to spend
the rest of the session building
a complete web application.
We'll show you how to design the
interface and structure your application.
We'll show you how to interact
with a web server to fetch
your application's content.
And then finally,
we'll apply some finishing touches
and polish before deploying the
application for everyone to use.
The application that we're going
to build today is Sugarwater.
Imagine that you're at a party with
a whole bunch of thirsty people,
and somebody asks you to play bartender.
Well, Sugarwater can help you.
Tell it what ingredients
you have available.
It will suggest drinks that you
can make and give you the recipes.
We're going to build this
application here today.
But before we do that,
let me go to the demo machine
and actually give you a
brief tour of Dashcode.
Can I have the demo, please?
Thank you.
So when you first launch Dashcode,
you'll see the Template Chooser panel.
This is where you can choose from
a number of different starting
points to make your application.
And as you can see,
all the widget templates are still here.
But now there's a new category of
templates for web applications.
The Custom Template gives you
a blank slate to start from
to build your application.
The last two give you nearly complete web
applications where all you really have
to do is supply an RSS or a podcast URL.
The browser we'll actually
use for our application later.
So for now,
let's start with the Utility Template.
The focus in Dashcode is on the canvas.
This is this large area
in the center where your
application's interface is shown.
To the left is the Navigator.
This is where you can see the
DOM structure of your HTML.
Below the Navigator,
each template comes with a set of
steps to help guide you through the
things that you'll need to do in
order to complete the application.
And in that same area,
you can display all the files
that are part of your project.
When you're ready to start
editing your JavaScript,
Dashcode's integrated code editor
appears beneath the canvas.
Dashcode also has an inspector panel.
Where you can view and edit
properties associated with the current
selected elements in the canvas.
and a library where you can
find parts and code snippets
to add to your application.
Let's see what happens when
we run our application.
When you run, Dashcode launches your web
app in the iPhone simulator so
that you can see exactly what
it'll look like on the phone.
Back in Dashcode,
the canvas has been replaced by a
run log where you can see any console
output that your application generates
for debugging purposes and where
any errors are reported as well.
Now, if we stop,
if we pause the application,
then we start to get debugger controls.
As you can see, the stack backtrace,
along with all the local
variables for where we've stopped,
is displayed in the upper area.
And down below in the code view,
Dashcode highlights the line of code
where you're currently executing.
So we're going to see a lot more
of all of these things later on.
But for now, let's go back to the slides.
So we've just seen basically all the
components of Dashcode's workflow.
The main point to take away from
this is that Dashcode is centered
around visual interface design.
The canvas is the
centerpiece of the window,
and you do all of your
interface design in that area.
You add user interface elements
to your application by dragging
parts out of the library.
Parts are basically
prepackaged interface elements.
Once they're in there,
you modify them through direct
manipulation on the canvas
or through the inspectors.
And then finally,
when you're ready to start adding
behavior to your application,
you use the integrated code editor.
Now, there's a lot of different ways
to write a web application.
Dashcode uses a pattern that's
been gaining popularity in
recent years called Ajax.
Ajax applications have a couple
of distinguishing characteristics.
They tend to fetch their
content asynchronously,
and they manage their interfaces
by modifying the DOM directly.
As a result,
Ajax applications feel more responsive.
And they can be more immediate
because they don't rely on page
loading to refresh their interfaces.
They can also take advantage of advanced
CSS and JavaScript functionality,
like the CSS visual effects
that have been described in
other sessions during the week.
All right, now that we have an
understanding of the basics,
let's actually get started
building our application.
And to do that,
to show us how to design the interface
and how to structure the application,
I'd like to ask Daniel Gobera
to come up and give us a hand.
Thank you, Mike.
Good afternoon.
My name is Daniel Gobera,
and I'm a software engineer
in the Dashcode team.
And what I want to show you today is
how Dashcode can help you get amazing
results in a very short time when
designing your iPhone web application.
We'll take a look at the visual
tools for designing the application
and at the library of parts.
So let's start by looking at
the recommended architecture
for applications.
Mike mentioned that iPhone web
applications tend to use AJAX to get
the data from the server asynchronously,
typically in XML or JSON format.
Well, on the client side,
the application is going to be structured
using the model view controller pattern.
Now, the model layer is the one that
is responsible for managing all
the data on the application,
including the one that
came from the server.
The View layer is going to present the
interface to the user using HTML and CSS.
The Controller layer is the
JavaScript code that ties
the other two together.
One of the biggest benefits of
this structure is that the code
is going to be highly reusable.
So, for example,
you can use the same model
objects in another application or
simply replace the view layer to
get a different user interface.
Well, regardless of the architecture
you choose for your application,
I would really like to
encourage you to do one thing.
and that is design before you build.
Really, you will get dramatically better
results if you just take some time
before you start actually building
the application to get a clear
idea of what you want it to be.
For example,
for the Sugarwater application
we're going to be building today,
it will be an application
for thirsty people to find
recipes of mixed-use drinks.
This is just one sentence that describes
what the application is going to be.
And notice we're identifying
our target audience.
So if you ever met a thirsty person,
you know that they can be dangerous.
And probably not as bad as hungry people.
But we better provide a very simple
search and provide results really quickly
because they want their drink right now.
So all our design is
going to be based on that.
And the image you see here is not
just a decoration for the slide.
Well, probably the coffee stains.
But this is actually the sketches we
made for when we were designing the
demo we're going to be building today.
So you can get a clear idea of how
the user is going to navigate between
the multiple views and how the
application is going to be structured.
Once you have the clear
idea of what you want,
it's time to launch Dashcode and start
using the library of parts as the
building blocks for the application.
Mike mentioned some slides ago that
parts are prepackaged interface elements.
There's something I want
to highlight here,
prepackaged.
This means that we have done all
the work to write all the HTML,
CSS, and JavaScript code to make
these parts work correctly.
So you don't have to do any of that.
You can simply drag them from the
library into your application,
and they'll work.
If you ever used Dashcode before,
you may be familiar with
some of these parts.
We have the buttons, shapes, controls,
and fields.
In Dashcode 2.0,
we added some new shiny parts to
support web application development.
We have, for example, the list,
which is a very common way to
display information on the iPhone.
We have the browser,
which helps the user navigate to deeper
and deeper levels of detail and then
navigate back using the back button.
Finally, we have the stack layout.
This one's interesting.
It manages a set of swappable views where
only one of them is visible at a time,
and you can specify an animated
transition between them.
For example,
the browser is going to use the stack
layout to manage the multiple views,
and it uses a push transition
to go from one to the next.
Let's look at the list and the
browser in some more detail.
When you use a list,
you're going to interact with
the first row in the canvas.
This is going to act as a template
that will be cloned for every
row of data you want to display.
This means that whatever you
put on that row is going to
be replicated in the rest.
The way you put data into the list
is by using the JavaScript API.
If you've ever done anything in Cocoa,
you may be familiar with
the data source pattern.
This is actually very simple.
It's just a JavaScript object that you
implement that responds to two methods.
Number of rows and prepare row.
Number of rows is going to
return the number of rows
you want your list to have.
So, for example, here we'll return four.
Prepare row is going to be
called four times so it has a
chance to customize each of these
rows and fill it in with data.
It receives three parameters that
I'll explain later in the demo.
Let's look at the browser.
This one's going to help
you show information in a
hierarchical fashion so the user
can navigate to different levels.
And believe me, you don't want to write
one of these from scratch.
Let me repeat that.
You don't want to write
one of these from scratch.
Really, just to get it to work in
Keynote took me like an hour.
So to write it in JavaScript and
CSS can be painful.
So we provide it as a packaged part,
so you can just drag it
from the library and use it.
It has a very simple JavaScript API used
called the go-forward method.
To make it navigate to the next view,
you tell it to which view,
and you tell it what is going to
be the title in the other view.
So why don't we put all of these
parts together and start building
the Sugarwire application?
This application has two views,
one with a list of drinks and one with
the detail of the drink the user selects.
So probably the browser is going to
be the best starting point for this.
This template already has a browser part,
and as we saw before,
the browser uses Stack Layout.
The Stack Layout has
two views in this case.
It can have as many as you want.
It has one for the list level and
one for the detail level to display
the detail of the item selected.
This is good because I do want a list,
but I don't want this kind of list.
So I'm going to remove it,
and from the library of parts,
I'm going to drag the other kind of list,
which is the rounded rectangle.
Now, it doesn't look very good on white,
so I'm going to remove the
background in the graphics vector.
And those stripes,
we have seen them over and over,
so they're a bit boring for sugar water.
Let's just change that background.
and Mike Krahl.
The header doesn't match.
Let me change the colors for that.
While I'm doing this,
Dashcode is generating all the images to
get the glass and gradient effects and
just putting them in the right place.
So you never have to go to an image
editor and bring the images back.
Let's just change the title.
Okay.
Now it's time to customize the list.
In every row,
I want to display the name of the drink,
a description, an image,
and the rating to show how good it is.
So I'm going to make it a bit larger
so I have some space for that.
Notice that when I modify
the template row,
everything else is affected.
This is going to affect how every
row is going to be displayed.
I'm going to have an image here
that will be just a placeholder
to help me with layout.
And to show the summary,
I'm going to have another text part,
which I'm going to drag from the library,
put it right here.
Make it probably as
wide as the other one.
And let's make the font smaller here,
maybe gray.
Now, to display the rating,
I could use some images,
but Dashcode provides another part,
horizontal level,
which is going to be very
useful for this purpose.
If you don't like the gray bars,
it's showing by default.
That's not a problem because this
part is totally customizable.
So you can change the images.
Let's just change it for an empty star.
and a yellow star for the on state.
Now, I want five stars here,
so I'm going to make this a bit wider.
And I'm going to tell it
to use a range from 0 to 5.
And the initial value is going to be 3,
so I can see how it's going to look like.
Now, the important thing to know here
is that while I'm doing all this,
Dashcode is generating all the
HTML and CSS code to get this effect.
So, just to show you here.
I'm going to open the CSS file
and navigate to the rule
that applies to the arrow.
And you can see that
while I drag it around,
it is regenerating this CSS file.
And just look at that.
I mean, it's gorgeous CSS.
It's completely readable,
and it's very well-structured.
So if you want, if you need to,
you can go here and change it by hand.
Most of the time, you won't need to.
So let's just hide it.
Now, to be able to filter this list,
I'm going to have a set of buttons.
Each button is going to represent one
ingredient the user can turn on and off.
For that,
I'm going to have a rounded box,
which is going to be the
container for the buttons.
Let's make it a bit taller and
maybe give it some transparency.
Oh, sorry, something I forgot.
We need to be able to find
these elements during runtime.
So I'm going to give them better names.
This is going to be the drink name,
the drink image.
The drink summary and the drink rating.
Now, since I want a button
for each ingredient,
I'm going to drag the bottom
part from the library,
put it right here.
And I'm going to resize
that to be maybe 45 by 50.
I don't want a label in this button,
so I'm going to remove it.
I instead want an image for each.
So I can go to the Attributes
Inspector and drag.
This is going to be my pineapple button.
Now, Dashcode already generates a
pressed version of the image,
which is slightly darker.
I want to use my own,
so I'm going to use the one
with the nice purple glow.
Okay, so once I have that, well,
it doesn't look very good
with that background.
So let's remove the fill and the stroke.
I want to have six of these buttons,
one for each ingredient.
So I can just press
Command-D to duplicate.
And Dashcode's going to show some
guidelines to help me align them.
And if I press Command-D again,
it's going to remember what I did
to the previous one and keep
doing it until I have six I want.
And just let's give them a name so I can
know which ingredient they represent.
It's going to be the pineapple,
and you probably don't want
to see me change all of them.
So as in any other good cooking show,
we have something ready out of the oven.
We simply changed the images for
all the buttons and assigned IDs for
the names of the ingredients.
OK, so we are done with the layout.
It's time to make this actually work.
This list is a static list.
That means that here in the inspector,
we say what data is
going to be in each row.
Let's make it dynamic so we
can change it during runtime.
As we saw, the list uses a data source.
In this case,
I'm going to use ListController.
This is a JavaScript object
that came with a template,
and it implements the two methods we saw,
number of rows and prepareRow.
I want my list controller to also keep
track of the drinks being shown and
the ingredients used for filtering.
So what I'll do,
I just add a bit of code here.
and the rest of the team.
To add a drinks and
ingredients properties,
they're just simple arrays.
They're initially empty.
The set drinks method is going
to reload the data on the list.
Now, in Dashcode, when you want to call a
JavaScript API of a part,
you get a reference to the main
element using getElementById,
in this case, the list,
which is this element right here.
And you use the dot object property
to get access to all the methods.
So in this case,
we're calling reload data.
To fetch drinks later on,
we're going to retrieve the
real data from the server.
For now, just to get us up and running,
we're going to use some sample data.
which I'm going to drag right here.
It's just a JavaScript array where each
object represents the data of one drink.
Now it's time to implement
number of rows and prepare row.
Here I want to return...
The number of elements
in the drinks array.
So I can do that.
And if there's nothing in that array,
I still want one row so I can display
a message that says no results,
right?
Now in prepare row,
we're going to customize
each of these rows.
So I'm going to remove the implementation
that came with the template and
add the one I wrote a bit earlier.
It's actually very simple.
Remember it receives three parameters?
Row element is the actual DOM element
for the row we are preparing.
Row index is the number of the
row we are currently processing.
and Template Elements,
this one's interesting.
Remember,
all of these elements have an ID,
but they're going to be cloned.
Well, in the DOM,
duplicate IDs are not allowed.
So when they're duplicated,
we need to remove the IDs.
How are we going to find these elements?
Well,
Template Elements contains a reference
to all the elements in the current row.
So let's see an example.
Here, I'm getting the current drink to
display from the drinks array.
And through template elements,
I am getting the drink name.
This is the same ID that
the original element had.
And I'm sending the inner
text to the name of the drink.
Then I'm doing the same with the
source of the image to the summary,
to the text of the summary,
and setting the value on the rating.
Notice that, again,
we're using the dot object property
to access the JavaScript API.
Finally, I want to add a click handler to
the row so when the user selects it,
we can do something.
Here we are notifying the detail
controller to fetch this drink.
I'll explain this later.
We're getting a reference to the browser.
And again,
through the dot object property,
I'm calling the go forward method.
I wanted to navigate to the other view,
which is detail level.
It is this one.
And I want to set the title to
recipe when we navigate to that view.
If there are no results,
I am setting the drink name to be no
drinks and hiding all other elements.
One more thing we have to do.
The detail controller is the
controller element for this view.
It's going to control
everything that happens here.
So let's remove the implementation
that came with the template.
And I'm going to have
a really simple one.
For now,
I just have a fetch drink method.
It gets a reference to
detail title element,
which is this one.
And it just sets the inner
text to the name of the drink.
And to get things up and running,
when the application loads,
it's going to call the load method.
In here, I'm going to call this
controller .fetchDrinks.
So you can see something with
the application launches.
So I think we're ready to run it
and see if things are working.
So it launches in the simulator,
and we can see that the list is
being filled with the data from
the sample data array we had.
and when I click on one of them,
the browser navigates to the next view
and shows the detail for this drink.
Well, for now, it's just the title,
but we'll change that later.
It also keeps track of the current title,
the Back button,
and it knows how to navigate back.
Notice I never had to call another method
to go back or to tell it how to go back.
Now, these buttons are still not working,
so let's do something about that.
I go back to the list level and
I can just select all of them.
And over here in the behavior inspector,
I can assign a JavaScript function
handler for any of these events.
So when the user clicks,
I want to call ingredient clicked.
If the function does not exist,
Dashcode is going to generate it for us,
and we can simply fill in the contents.
So I'm going to have a simple
implementation for that.
This just gets an element-- sorry,
gets a reference to the
button that was clicked.
And from the ID,
I will know the name of the ingredient.
I'm going to notify the list
controller and tell it to toggle
that ingredient for filtering.
And based on the result of that,
I'm going to set--
Set the state of the button to be
on or off so it remains highlighted.
So I only need to implement this
method in the list controller.
So I'll just scroll back up and...
This is just a very simple method that
keeps track of the ingredients array,
adds and removes ingredients,
and logs in the console.
Which ingredients we're
using for filtering.
For now, it's not going to
actually do the filtering.
It's just going to log in
the console what's happening.
I think we can run it again.
It's really important to run
the application very often,
as often as you make changes to
check that everything is working.
So if I test these buttons,
I can see that they
remain in the on state,
and the console is logging the current
ingredients I'm using for filtering.
So that's good.
This is working.
And this is as far as
we'll take it for now.
We'll finish it later.
So if we can go back to slides, please.
So what we saw in this section is
how to use the model view controller
pattern for iPhone web applications.
And we saw how to use the visual
design tools to design the interface
visually without writing any code.
And how to use the parts as the
building blocks for the application.
Well, once we have the
interface up and running,
it's time to make it
really work with real data.
And for that,
I want to introduce Michael,
who's going to help us retrieve
some data from the server.
So, Michael.
Thank you.
Thanks, Daniel.
I'm Mike Kahl.
I work on Dashcode.
And today I'm going to show you how we
can hook up this web app to live data.
We have set up a web server that
maintains a database of drink recipes,
and it responds to various queries.
Let's take a look.
Here's a sample query that is a URL and
it asks the server for a list of
drinks made with certain ingredients.
And the server might respond with
a list of drinks and some summary
information about each one.
Here's another query.
This one asks for the
recipe for a given drink,
and the server might respond with
expanded information about that drink,
including the recipe.
I'd like to talk a little bit about
the format of these responses.
We've chosen not to use some complicated
XML that we would then have to parse.
Instead,
the server is supplying results that look
just like the JavaScript data that our
web app already knows how to deal with.
This is known as
JavaScript Object Notation,
or JSON.
JSON is a data interchange format
that is being used more and more
these days as an alternative to XML.
Its advantage is that
it's very easy to read,
both by humans and by computers.
There are JSON implementations for
dozens of programming languages.
But its simplicity is particularly
apparent with JavaScript because JSON is,
in fact,
a subset of the literal syntax that
JavaScript already understands.
So parsing JSON can be as
simple as just calling eval,
which is a built-in JavaScript function
that takes a string and
executes it as JavaScript.
And the parentheses are there to
tell eval that its argument is an
expression and not a statement.
So is that really all there is to it?
Well, yes and no.
If you totally trust the data
coming down from your server,
then yeah, it's fine.
But eval will execute any JavaScript,
not just the JSON subset.
So a problem on the server could
adversely affect your client as well.
It might not be such a good idea to
just blindly eval arbitrary JavaScript.
We can get a little
bit more sophisticated.
There are two things we can do.
First, we can catch any exceptions,
such as a syntax error,
that might occur when we
try to eval the string.
And secondly,
We can preflight the string to see
whether it looks like it's safe to eval.
If it's not safe to eval,
or if there's a syntax
error or other exception,
then this parseJSON function
will return undefined.
Let's take a look at
our preflighting code.
Now, this uses regular expressions.
It's a little bit messy,
but bear with me.
It's actually not as bad as it looks.
This comes from the JSON specification
and it's based on a simple observation.
Outside of constant strings,
JSON actually has a very
limited character set.
So we remove the strings and then
we check to see whether what's
left consists only of characters
that can appear in valid JSON.
And the important thing to note is that
valid JSON cannot include parentheses.
And without parentheses,
you can't make a function call.
And it can't contain an equal sign,
so you can't do assignment.
So although a string that passes
this check isn't necessarily
guaranteed to be valid JSON,
at least it's pretty much impossible
for evaling it to do any damage.
So let's return to how we get
the data down from the server.
These are our steps.
We're going to use two technologies,
JSON, which we've just talked about,
and XML HTTP request,
which is a JavaScript object
originally designed to retrieve
XML data from a web server,
but it works just as well
with any kind of data,
including JSON.
So we're going to replace the
implementation of this fetch drinks
method of the list controller,
which is called whenever we need
to repopulate the list of drinks,
and in particular it's called
when the web app first is loaded.
We'll start by creating a new
XML HTTP request instance.
And we'll point it at our web server
by supplying an appropriate query URL.
Also,
we disable caching so that we always
get the most recent drink recipes
from our constantly changing database.
And an important thing to
know about XML HTTP request
is that it's asynchronous.
When we send this request,
the reply is going to
come back sometime later,
hopefully only a few milliseconds later.
But still,
we need to treat the arrival of the
data as an asynchronous event by
specifying a callback function which
will be invoked when the event occurs.
Finally,
we send our request out into the world.
And we also record a reference to the
request that we sent most recently.
And we'll see in just a bit why that
turns out to be a useful thing to do.
But first, let's look at how we
construct the query URL.
If no ingredients are selected,
then we ask the server for a list
of the most highly rated drinks.
If one or more ingredients are selected,
then we ask for the drinks that
are made with those ingredients.
And it's generally a good
idea to call encodeUri,
which is a built-in JavaScript function,
in order to percent encode any
special characters that might
appear in the ingredient names.
So that's our query.
Now let's move on to the function
that is called to process
the data once it arrives.
Now, remember,
the data arrives asynchronously.
So we need to think about what
would happen if while we're
waiting for the data to arrive,
the user selects another ingredient.
Well, fetch drinks will be called again,
and a second request will be issued,
and now there'll be two
requests outstanding.
And both responses will come back,
and they might even come
back out of sequence,
because the Internet is
unpredictable that way.
We need to defend against that.
So in the receive data method,
we make sure that we act only
in response to the request
that we sent most recently.
If a response arrives,
if a response to an earlier request
arrives later out of sequence,
then we want to ignore it.
Okay.
If everything went well,
we now have a list of
drinks in JSON format.
But if there was a server error or if
the JSON was ill-formed in any way,
then this drinks variable
is now undefined.
Finally, we can update our UI.
Now, in your own web apps,
you might consider having more
robust error reporting than this.
But this is a demo,
so if anything went wrong,
we will fall back on an empty
list for the list of drinks.
Okay, let's try it out.
So this project is pretty
much as Daniel left it,
except that I've removed
the dummy sample data.
We won't be using it anymore.
And I've added in all the code
that we just saw from the slides.
So let's give it a try.
How many people think that this is
going to just work the first time?
If it works the first time,
then I won't get to show
you Dashcode's debugger.
through an exception.
Let's take a look.
Dashcode is telling us
See that?
Dashcode is telling us that
this.receiveData was undefined.
So let's look at the code.
We're trying to call the receiveData
method of the list controller.
Well, let's go to the variables view and
take a look at the this object.
And that doesn't look like
our list controller at all.
In fact, that's an XML HTTP request.
How did that happen?
It turns out that in JavaScript,
whenever a function is called,
The this object always
receives a fresh value.
You can think of it as a hidden
argument to the function.
In this case,
when the callback function was called,
the system, for whatever reason,
passed in the XMLHTML request object.
Well, we wrote this code expecting
that we could refer to the list
controller from the outer scope.
Well, that's a common programming
error in JavaScript,
but it's easy to work around.
We just introduced a new local variable,
and we'll call it self because
we're Objective-C programmers,
and self is not a reserved
word in JavaScript.
And we'll make it refer
to the list controller.
And then we change our method
call to use that instead.
So let's run it.
How many people think it's
going to work this time?
Still no bites.
Well, this time, no exception,
but also no drinks.
So to debug this,
we're going to use a new
feature of Dashcode 2.0,
the resource log.
The resource log is a list
of the resources that have
been loaded at runtime,
whether from the local file
system or over the network.
We're interested in seeing
what came in over the network.
and nothing came in over the network.
That can't be good.
What happened to our query?
Here it is.
But look at that URL.
We thought that query was
going to go to our web server,
but it tried to find it
on a local file system,
and of course there was no response.
So let's go look at the code
that constructed that query URL.
And it's true.
We never explicitly named the web server.
We just assumed that
The query would go to the same
server that the web page came from.
And that's actually a valid assumption
once we've deployed this web app
and we're viewing it on our iPhones.
But during development, the web page,
the HTML,
comes from the local file system.
But the query still needs
to go to the server.
So to work around that,
we're going to introduce a base URL,
which is going to be a global
variable that will initialize to point
explicitly to our web server only
when we're running under Dashcode.
When we're deployed,
we want it to be the empty string.
So in order to figure out
how to make that distinction,
let's turn to JavaScript's evaluator,
which is a JavaScript console
and our web app is still running,
so we have live access
to the JavaScript world.
There's a property, location.href,
that tells us where the
HTML file came from.
And as you can see,
it's a file-based URL.
Now, I think there's another property
that might be more useful.
We can find it using code completion.
That's the one I was thinking of,
and that's just the file
colon portion of the URL.
So let's use that.
Go down to our onload handler
and initialize base URL depending
on location.protocol.
If it's file colon,
then we'll name our web server.
and otherwise,
we want it to be the empty string.
Okay.
Now,
there's actually one more place where we
need to also refer to base URL because
we're loading images from the server.
Okay, now we're ready to run.
Third time's a charm, right?
And this time everything works.
We've got our list of popular drinks.
We've got our list of popular drinks,
and let's look at the resource log.
Here's our query.
This time it went...
To the web server, there was a response.
And we can even look at
the JSON that came back.
We can also see the images that
were downloaded from the server.
Let's try out our filtering.
Here are the drinks that
are made with orange juice.
Here are the drinks that are
made with orange juice and honey.
Oh, there's only one.
I want to point out,
it looks like in our drink summary
that there might be some words missing.
Can you see that?
So let's go look at
the resource log again.
And yeah, it's true.
It looks like the words
"plenty of fruit" got clipped.
What we'd like to have happen is for
the list row to get taller automatically
in order to accommodate any extra text.
Well,
we're going to show you how to do that
a little bit later in the session.
But first,
there's one more thing I want to do.
I want to implement the last query,
the recipe query.
This is the query that's going
to be made whenever we select a
drink and go to the detail page.
So let's go to the detail controller.
And I'm actually going to replace
the detail controller with some
code that I have up my sleeve here.
This code should be very familiar.
We fire off an XML HTTP request.
Here's our query.
It's a little bit different.
This time we're asking for the recipe.
The data comes in.
It's JSON.
We display the UI.
It's very much the same
code as we saw before,
just this time in the detail controller
instead of the list controller.
So let's run it.
And now when we click on a drink, well,
we don't actually see any visible
difference because we haven't hooked
up the UI for the detail page yet.
But the data's there.
Well, we're going to be hooking up that
UI a little bit later in the session,
but it would be a good idea to verify
that the data did arrive correctly.
Now, we could use the resource log again,
but
Let me show you a different way to do it.
I've already shown you
that a couple times.
We can go and we can set a breakpoint
here in the code at the spot where
we're about to display the drink data.
And now, when we click on a drink,
the breakpoint is reached.
And we can go up to the variables
view and twist down the drink
variable and see that all of the
fields have been properly populated.
So it works.
Back to slides, please.
Okay,
so we've seen how to hook up a web app
to a web server and get the data down.
And we've gotten a quick tour of
Dashcode's debugging facilities.
And we've gotten a few hopefully
useful JavaScript programming tips.
So now, to put the finishing touches
on our fledgling web app,
I'd like to introduce Sarah Laiwal.
Sarah?
and I am proud to be a Dashcode engineer.
I'm going to show you how
to add finishing touches to
your iPhone web application.
First,
I'll cover a few advanced positioning
and layout techniques so that we can
ensure your web application is polished
and can adapt to a changing environment.
Then I'll show you how to add a home
screen icon to your web application
using Dashcode and then share your
web application with the world.
provides you with two ways to lay
out the elements in your interface.
The first one is absolute positioning,
and the second one is
document flow positioning.
Appset positioning is useful when you
don't expect elements on your page
to grow or interact with one another.
You expect them to remain independent
of each other and in the same
location relative to their container.
AFSA positioning is also advantageous
when you want to achieve complex designs,
like overlapping elements.
But although absolute
positioning has its benefits,
it's not always advantageous
when you have a layout like this.
You have two boxes that you're
designing at design time,
but you don't know how much text
you're receiving at runtime.
So if you receive one
sentence from the database,
that's great because this layout works.
But if you receive multiple sentences,
then the green and the blue box start to
overlap and the text becomes unreadable.
So what you'll want to do here is
change the positioning from absolute
for both the boxes to document flow.
So as the green box expands,
the blue box gets pushed down.
Now let's look at another
situation where the elements
on your page can be affected.
The iPhone can be held in portrait
mode or in landscape mode.
And you want the elements on your
page to be able to interact with this.
So Dashcode provides you with
the layout tools to do just that.
If you've used Interface Builder before,
the concept of springs will
be very familiar to you.
And if you haven't, well, that's OK.
Just playing with Dashcode for a couple
of minutes will make things clear.
So suppose you have an element
that you want centered when
the iPhone orientation changes.
What you'll do here is set springs on
the outer horizontal margins to make
sure that the box's width is constant.
So as the iPhone rotates,
your box remains centered.
Let's suppose you want the
elements on your page to grow as
the iPhone orientation changes.
What you'll do here is set inner
horizontal springs to make sure that
the box's width is now variable.
As your iPhone rotates,
your element grows.
You might want a pinned behavior
where you want certain elements to
stay pinned in certain locations,
like to the left or to the right.
By setting the appropriate springs,
you can accomplish that.
So now that I've shown you how to layout,
how to add finishing
touches to your layout,
I'm going to show you how to add a home
screen icon to your web application.
Now you might be wondering
why you should do that.
Well, you should do that because
the iPhone has several icons.
It has a mail icon, the stocks icon,
lots of icons.
And Safari allows you as a user
to add a home screen icon for your
web application to the home screen.
So you want an icon that represents your
web application when the user adds your
web application to their home screen.
The Dashcode has a design
editor that lets you do that.
We give you the proper iPhone dimensions.
And via the inspector,
you can add a gradient or
color to the background.
And if you have an orange or an image,
you can pop it right on.
So now that I've shown you how to
lay out the elements on your page
or add finishing touches to them,
and I've shown you how to add a home
screen icon to your web application,
I think you're ready to share your
web application with the world.
So Dash Code lets you deploy
to three types of web servers.
You have .mac, webdev-to-mac-os10 server,
and local web server.
If you choose not to deploy
to one of these servers,
that's all right,
because Dash Code lets you save
your website folder locally,
and then you can deploy it to
wherever you want to deploy it to.
So let's go ahead and add these
finishing touches to Sugarwater.
Earlier, the iPhone has two different
types of orientation:
portrait
and Landscape.
Sugarwater is currently in portrait mode.
If you'd like to see
it in landscape mode,
You can click on this button right
here that says "Rotate to landscape
orientation." And by default,
Dashcode scales a page up
to fit the wider screen.
If you don't want the page to
scale up to fit the wider screen,
you can go into Application Attributes.
and select Adjust Page Width to Fit so
that when you rotate Sugarwater again,
now the page has grown wider
to fit the wider screen.
For Sugarwater,
we're going to keep this setting.
And if we keep the setting,
notice we have too much
white space over here,
and the button box is no longer centered.
So this doesn't look good.
So we'll go ahead and
select the button box.
Open up the inspector.
We'll go into the metrics
inspector and put outer
horizontal springs on the margins.
So as the iPhone rotates,
the button box remains centered.
Now, if you recall from Mike's demo,
the text of the drink
was being clipped off.
And that was because the
elements inside a list row are
using absolute positioning,
even though the list
itself uses document flow.
So our first instinct
might be to make the text
[Transcript missing]
So, you'll want to do here is select
Text and Ratings and change the
layout to use Document Flow.
So now, as the text expands,
the ratings gets pushed down.
But now we have another problem,
and that's that the ratings,
the list itself is not expanding.
So we can select the list.
and give it inner vertical springs so
that the list's height is now variable.
As the text expands,
the list begins to grow.
This is exactly what we want.
But now we have two more issues here,
aesthetic issues.
The first one is that the ratings is
touching the bottom of the list row.
And the drink and the chevron
images are no longer centered.
So let's solve both these problems.
For the ratings, we'll just give it a
bottom margin of 8 pixels.
And we'll select the drink
and the chevron and give
them outer vertical springs.
So now, as the list expands,
the drink image stays centered and the
ratings have a bottom margin of 8 pixels.
So now we're done adding finishing
touches to the detail view.
So let's-- to the list view.
Let's proceed to the detail view.
For the detail view,
I've already added a box and image
and done all the layout for that
because you've already seen it being
done in the two demos beforehand.
So the crux of this page is that
I want to be able to see the steps
and the ingredients for this page,
for the drink.
What I can do is drag a text
box and make sure that the
ingredients are always on top and
the steps are always on the bottom.
But if I do that,
then my user is going to scroll a lot
to find out that they might have to bake
something at 350 degrees at the end.
So instead of doing that,
I want to use a stack layout,
because the stack layout
provides me with two views.
So I can easily use that and go from
the ingredients view to the steps view.
So I'll go ahead and drag a Stack Layout.
And again, Stack Layout has two views,
view one and view two.
And in view one,
I want to show the ingredients.
So I'll drag in a rounded
box and a text part.
The text is touching the left wall,
and that doesn't look good.
So we'll go ahead and give
the box a text padding of...
That looks better.
And because we want to go from the
ingredients view to the steps view,
I need a push button,
which I'll put directly under the text.
And now let's make the button look
like the back button by giving
it a color using the sampler.
And now let's go ahead and take
a look at how this page responds
to the iPhone orientation change.
Notice that the button is no
longer to the right of the box.
To fix that, we need to give it springs.
And we will give it left springs.
So now as the iPhone orientation changes,
the button itself remains to the right.
So this is good.
And we'll expand the
text just a little bit.
This is the Ingredients view.
The Steps view looks exactly
like the Ingredients view,
except it's going to show the steps.
So I'm just going to copy this
box and paste it into View 2.
Now, before I write any code,
it's always best practice
to rename these IDs.
But because you've already
seen IDs being renamed,
and it's kind of a
boring thing to look at,
I'm going to--
Open up this project right here,
which is everything that
you've already seen,
but the IDs are renamed.
And now, let's go ahead and take a look
at how our interface looks.
You can go ahead and select
the orange and the honey.
And now we'll see that sweet and creamy
with plenty of fruit is now showing.
The entire text is
showing for this drink.
And here's our steps view.
And nothing happens.
And that's because I haven't set the
onClick handlers for this button.
So we can quit out of the simulator.
And we'll go here and select ingredients,
go into on click,
and say show ingredients right here.
For those of you who don't want to
show you how to type all this code out,
I already have snippets ready for you.
And I'm going to drag show
ingredients and steps.
I'm going to remove this.
discuss this code.
So show the ingredients.
All it's doing is getting
The Detail Stack is getting the
Stack Layout by its ID called
Detail Stack and then setting the
current view from the Stack Layout
API to show the ingredients view.
StepsView is doing the same thing.
Show Steps is doing the same thing,
except it's taking us to the StepsView.
So for the Ingredients button,
we'll add the on-click handle,
which is Show Ingredients.
I already did that, so it's there.
And for the Steps button,
we'll go ahead and say Show Steps.
will test the transition from Steps
view to the Ingredients view and the
Ingredients feedback to the Steps view.
Again, I'll select orange and honey.
Look at steps and it goes to ingredients
and ingredients goes back to steps.
But because we've already used
this push transition to go from
the list view to the detailed view,
we should probably use another
transition to go from the steps to the
ingredients view back to the steps view.
And of course, the back end is not
connected to the front end,
so we should take care of that.
To change the transitions,
we'll select the stack layout,
go into the inspector,
and change the transition
from push to flip.
And now we'll connect the back end.
What the back end is doing is
getting the reference to an object,
and setting the text
to be its inner HTML.
So we'll hit Run.
will stick to the honey
and the orange drink.
And now we can build our
drink with these ingredients.
uses the flips to the ingredients
and ingredients back to steps.
So this is working.
And we've finally finished
polishing sugar water.
So our next step is to
add a home screen icon.
To do that, I'm just going to go into the
Fill and Stroke Inspector.
You can select this light
green for the top gradient.
and Dark Green for the bottom gradient.
[Transcript missing]
So, like Steve has his one more thing,
I have my own one more thing,
and that's Dashcode will send an email
to you with a deployed web application,
a link to the deployed web application,
so that you can easily test your
web application on the iPhone.
So, I'll just select that and hit Deploy.
We'll go to the iPhone.
Unlock the phone.
And now we have a
message waiting in mail.
It's from dashcode team dot mac.
And there's a link to Sugar Water.
So we'll go ahead and hit that.
And wait for Safari to load the page.
and we have our drinks on the iPhone.
So let's go ahead and make sure...
So let's go ahead and make sure
that our button box is centered as
the iPhone orientation changes from
portrait mode to landscape mode.
Of course, this has sticky on the back.
And I turned it off.
Your button box is centered.
I'll lift it again.
Time.
I no longer want that orange honey drink.
I want a coffee ice cream drink.
and I have a cappuccino cooler.
And we can see here what the
ingredients are to make the drink.
and I'll start to make the drink.
And our flip transition
is working nicely as well.
So now let's go ahead and take
a look at our home screen icon.
So using Safari, we'll add this web app
to our home screen.
There's Sugarwater,
and there's my pretty icon.
Hit Add.
And I'll never be thirsty again.
We've got a lot of information today,
a lot.
And what I hope you take
away from all of this are
The following things.
Dashcode is now for widgets
and web applications.
We let you create Ajax-based
applications visually with our
prepackaged parts that already have
behaviors associated with them.
We have layout tools available
to you so that you can make sure
your web application is polished,
can adapt to a changing environment,
and can adapt to dynamic content.
We also have a built-in debugger
and runtime tools for you
to solve your coding issues.
And when you're ready and comfortable
with your web application,
add a home screen icon to it in
literally seconds using Dashcode,
and then share your web
application with the world.
We hope that what you've seen here today
makes you excited to go out and use
Dashcode as your web application IDE.
If you're more interested in
Dashcode and related sessions,
we have a few available for you.
Unfortunately,
Session 313 and 379 have already passed,
but we'll have that available to
you via iTunes after the conference.
If you'd like to build your
iPhone web application hands-on,
come to the session on Thursday,
tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.
If you want to learn
more about Dashcodes,
primarily creating widgets,
we have a session for
you Friday at 10:30 AM.
If you have questions that we
can't answer in today's Q&A,
or you'd like to bring your code
by so we can take a look at it,
we have labs available for you
on both Thursday and Friday.
If you have more questions about labs,
Dashcode, sessions,
please contact Vicki Murley or
Mike Jurwitz or our Dashcode User Guide.